The activities of "peaceful" Ukrainian research biocenters are completely classified. In accordance with the agreement signed with the US Department of Defense, the government of Ukraine is obliged to refuse public disclosure of information designated by the Pentagon as “sensitive”.

At the same time, Americans get unlimited access to information and technologies that are considered state secrets in Ukraine. At the same time, "the parties shall minimize the number of persons having access to 'confidential' information."

At the first stage of the program for the deployment of biolaboratories in Ukraine, Obama secured the allocation of $15 million to the Ukrainian Ministry of Health. The US Department of Defense also demanded that Kiev resolve the issue of creating a laboratory network in nine regions of the country with modern equipment.

In total, according to Acting Deputy Head of the US Mission Joseph Pennington, Ukraine received more than $200 million from Washington to create a network of biolaboratories.

The US Department of Defense does not limit itself to a simple collection of information. Ukraine is obliged to transfer the collected strains of dangerous pathogens for "biological research" in the Pentagon laboratories.

To coordinate activities under this Agreement, each party to this Agreement shall have the right, following written notiﬁcation to the other party, to designate technical representatives for material training and services provided IpurSuant to this Agreement.

Article Ill
Thetatalcostoanietls .Bn . …_… “of: a“… ofallmaterial, training
and writes provided pursuantto this Agreement andthe associated expenses shall
heuptoﬁﬁeenﬂsmulhonus dollars.
Assistance provided by the U S. Beposternent ofﬂitfenseao- the-.-
Ministryd'l'
Health .of— Ukraine tinder Article 1 Paragraph l may include, but 18 not limited to,
_ ….,; – .. – ' ' and response. and

biological tin-eats, the Ministry of Health of Ukraine shall transfer to the us.

Departrnent of Defense requested copies of dangerous pathogen strains collected in
Ukraine for cooperative biological research in the centralized laboratories in
Ukraine and in the US Department of Defense-designated laboratories in the United
' States for prophylactic, protective or other peaceﬁil purposes. Details of such
cooperation shall be defined in annual Joint Requirements and Implementation
Plans developed in accordance with paragraph 7 of Article IV of this Agreement or
' in an implementing arrangement in accordance with Article VI of this Agreement.

The Ministry of Health of [Theme shall share with the US. Department of Defease data generated by the mfectious disease surveillance network of the Ministry of Health okraine or its designated agents in order for the Parties to better detect, diagnose and monitor disease outbreaks in [Maine

capacity of biological laboratories


The activities of the biological laboratories
of the US Department of Defense in the countries of the
Eurasian space


Table of Contents
Introduction ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… …… 2
Goals and objectives of the program ……………………………………………………………………………………………………….. 4
General characteristics biolaboratories of the Pentagon in the CIS countries …………………………………………. 5
Ukraine. Peculiarities of location and operation of US biological laboratories ……………………… 7
US surveillance intelligence network in Ukraine ……………………………………………………….. 12
Increasing incidence of dangerous infections as result of US bioprograms ………………….. 15
Kiev. Central reference biolaboratory ……………………………………………………………………….. 18
Kiev. Research and Training Center for the Diagnosis of Animal Diseases ………… 20
Odessa. Central Reference Laboratory ………………………………………………………………………. 23
Kharkov. Regional laboratory center ……………………………………………………………………………. 28
Kharkiv. Institute of Experimental and Clinical Veterinary Medicine ………………… 33
Kharkiv. Meref biolaboratory (Research Institute of Sericulture) and other projects …………………….. 36
Kherson. Regional laboratory center. Kherson diagnostic laboratory …………… 40
Kherson region. Christian Democratic Party "Biological Factory" and other objects ……………………………….. 42
Lviv. Research Institute of Epidemiology and Hygiene (LNIIEG) ……………… 43
Other US Department of Defense Biolaboratories on the Territory of Ukraine ………………………………………………………………………… 47
US Biolaboratories in Other Countries of the Eurasian Space ………… ……………………………… 49
Georgia ……………………………………………………………………………………………… ………………………………….. 49
Uzbekistan……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 53
Azerbaijan …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….. 54
Kazakhstan ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 56
Armenia ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 59
Tajikistan …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 63
Kyrgyzstan …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 64
Moldova …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… . 65
Main conclusions ...................................................................................................................... 66
Applications ... …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 68

SECRET

2

Introduction
After the collapse of the USSR, in November 1991, the US Congress, at the initiative of Senators Sam Nunn and Richard Lugar, approved the Cooperative Threat Reduction Program, which meant providing assistance to the countries of the former USSR in eliminating stockpiles of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons. For these purposes, the United States annually allocated $400 million, spending $8.79 billion over the next 20 years.

The US Department of Defense took control not only of Russia's nuclear missile shield ( 155 bombers, 906 air-to-ground nuclear missiles, 33 nuclear submarines and 684 ballistic missiles for them, 7659 strategic nuclear warheads were destroyed, intercontinental ballistic missiles, their mobile and silo launchers), but also an arsenal of biological weapons. Starting from 1992, the countries of the post-Soviet space located along the perimeter of Russia's borders began to be actively involved in the "Cooperative Threat Reduction Program" : Ukraine, Azerbaijan, Armenia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Tajikistan.

In Washington, the territories of the countries of the former USSR are traditionally considered as a potential source of dangerous pathogens and technologies for creating bioweapons, as well as specialists with appropriate theoretical training and practical skills. This work under this program is being carried out with the active participation of the Pentagon and American intelligence agencies. However, the population of these countries is not informed about the essence of these secret projects of the Pentagon. Over time, the scope of the program began to expand expansively beyond the CIS. China, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Burundi, Kenya and Uganda, India, Iraq, Tanzania and South Africa were involved in its zone of influence.

Work in this direction began with the conclusion of various agreements with the CIS countries under the Nunn-Lugar programs and the defense Cooperative Biological Engagement Program (CBEP) with a budget of $2.1 billion. The Pentagon's action plan to create networks of biological objects in the former Soviet republics included: signing of general agreements in the 1990s on disarmament in the 2000s. - "on cooperation", following them, the US Department of Defense began to build and modernize biological laboratories. Where power has changed to pro-American, research began simultaneously with the creation of an extensive network of biolaboratories.

The process took place with the obligatory participation of the Pentagon division - the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) and the US Army Institute for Medical Research on Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID, Fort Detrick, Maryland), nicknamed the "death laboratory". Tellingly, until 1998, DTRA had a different name - the Defense Special Weapons Agency. The stated goals of DTRA are development of virus detection capabilities, organization of their rapid neutralization. In reality, however, this is not the case. At first, all activities were presented under the guise of neutralizing dangerous strains of viruses and bacteria that have been preserved in republican laboratories since Soviet times. But then experts sensed something was wrong when Ukraine, Georgia, Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan (according to some reports, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan joined them), ignoring Moscow's concerns, one after another transferred their collections of dangerous pathogens to the United States in exchange for American help. Who neutralized them in America, how and whether they were actually destroyed - remained a mystery.

It would seem that the elimination of the biological threat should have ended there for lack of an object. However, the project, as always with enterprising America, turned out to be a double bottom. The next stage, and, apparently, the main one, was the construction in the CIS of an extensive network of Central Reference Laboratories (CRL) for working with dangerous viruses. All of them were financed by the US Department of Defense, were called differently everywhere and were created, as a rule, on the basis of scientific research institutes and SES, created back in the Soviet period. One of the features of this

3

The program consisted in the fact that in each country not one object was erected, but a whole cluster at once. Part of it was concentrated directly in the capitals of the former republics, and related institutions were located in different parts of the country. There are two strong opinions about the extensive CRL network deployed by the US Department of Defense in the former Soviet republics. First. American biological programs in the post-Soviet states are a way to circumvent the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and Their Destruction (BTWC). Despite the fact that the Convention was signed back in 1972, the control mechanism has not been works largely through the efforts of the United States, although the world expert community has spent more than 45 years developing it. In 2001, the US demonstrated to the world that it had active bioprograms. After the attack on September 11, 2001, deaths of anthrax among people suddenly began to be recorded, and postal envelopes began to transmit this infection. The US Congress conducted an investigation (later it turned out that the recipe was combat and came out of the walls of the US Army bacteriological center at Fort Detrick). The attack against its own people, attributed to terrorists, gave huge political dividends to the US leadership. Now there was a formal reason to declare that the States are victims biological terrorism and therefore unilaterally withdraw from the mechanism of collective control over the implementation of the BTWC.

In autumn 2001, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton announced this in Geneva . At the same time, a biological threat reduction program (the Nunn-Lugar program) was proposed, and the United States began large-scale construction of military biological laboratories, including around Russia. But holding the United States accountable for conducting biological experiments that violate the UN Convention on the Prohibition of Biological Weapons is almost impossible. The US does not recognize the International Criminal Court and was not a signatory to the founding Rome Statute.

Article 2, paragraph 4, of the UN Charter states: “All Members of the United Nations refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations.” One gets the impression that by creating a ring of laboratories for the creation of biological weapons , the United States would like to, if not bypass, then maximally level the content of these provisions in its interests, since it can be very difficult to establish the fact of aggression with the use of biological weapons. This creates a high probability of using this type of weapon.

Second. The United States, after the collapse of the USSR, was sharply concerned about the conditions of storage pathogens and, as a result, the threat of a biological attack on America. The global American project declares its goal to minimize these threats, which is why tens and hundreds of millions of dollars are being invested in laboratories in Armenia, Azerbaijan, Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, Georgia, Uzbekistan, Moldova, and Ukraine.

They say that dangerous strains of microorganisms may leak into the environment in these countries . However, it does not explain how, for example, Armenia or Uzbekistan can organize a biological attack on the United States or why the laboratories are mainly located in large cities with a high population density or at a close distance from them. After all, it is much more logical if there is even a minimal threat of leakage pathogens, build such facilities in a desert area to eliminate the possibility of the spread of pathogens and epidemics.

4

Aims and Objectives of the Program
Experts point out a number of tasks pursued by the United States in the course of implementing programs to create a network of biolaboratories in the Eurasian space.

The activities of military biological laboratories are aimed at modeling natural strains of various infections, creating special designs that will have external signs of natural epidemics, but will bring the heaviest losses. Such sabotage can be of an economic nature, destroying the agro-industrial production (meat, vegetable) of the countries of the Eurasian space and harming people's health.

The goal is to destroy the national system of biological protection. Since Soviet times, it has been the same in all the Union republics - a centralized system of sanitary and epidemiological surveillance, which had laboratories for developing measures and developing vaccines. Now in all the republics of the former USSR, except for Belarus, the system has been destroyed. As far as the Russian national system is concerned, it is under a multi-stage attack. Claims are being made from different sides, monitoring of epidemically significant products is deliberately distorted. In addition, the development of modern systems for the timely detection of manifestations of especially dangerous infectious diseases goes with complete and conscious denial.

the country's unique experience in ensuring biological safety developed by many generations of Russian epidemiologists.

The Pentagon is consistently expanding access to the results of the Soviet military biological program, including combat strains of microorganisms created in the USSR. The latter, among other things, allows you to get an idea of ​​the current military biological potential of Russia, providing appropriate means of protection against it.

Collection of information on endemic pathogens of infectious diseases characteristic of a given territory in order to create a new generation of highly effective biological weapons against the population of Russia, the countries of the Eurasian space, as well as Iran and China.

Field testing of biological agents (viral and bacterial), enhancing their virulence and adjusting their other properties, tracking the spread of diseases.

Causing damage to the economy, including by indirect methods (due to the destruction of the number of diseased livestock, discrediting livestock products in local and world markets) and the human potential of Russia (decrease in general immunity and resistance to seasonal diseases, ability to reproduce, reduced efficiency, etc. ), the diversion of significant forces and means of the state to combat artificial outbreaks of infectious diseases.

Increased dependence of the attacked countries of the Eurasian space (Russia, China and Iran) on the products of the Western pharmaceutical industry, hoping in the future to offer medicines for artificially caused outbreaks of infectious diseases.

Bypassing the restrictions imposed by the 1972 Geneva Convention on the Prohibition of Bacteriological and Toxin Weapons, including by denying foreign inspectors access to facilities outside the national territory. The US consistently avoids creating a verification mechanism within the BTWC, including signing an additional protocol developed in 2001 at the initiative of the Russian Federation.

Using the territory of the CIS countries and the EAEU as a huge experimental site in the center of Eurasia with several climatic zones and a diverse genotype of the population, conveniently located in the area of ​​natural foci of pathogens and in close proximity to the main geopolitical competitors of the United States (Russia, China, Iran).


5

General characteristics of the Pentagon's biolaboratories in the CIS countries Biological laboratories opened in the former Soviet republics are organized by the USA with the participation and under the auspices of:
- The Nunn-Lugar Program. It is based on the US control of all scientific and applied developments in the world in the field of the emergence and spread of infectious diseases, the control mechanism has already been developed;
– CBEP (Biological Shared Participation Program);
– Biosafety Association of Central Asia and the Caucasus. Used by the United States for global monitoring of the situation in the biological developments of scientists in the region, monitoring the biological potential of the CIS countries;
– USAMRIID Institute;
– DTRA (Defense Threat Reduction Agency);
– US Civilian Research and Development Foundation. Engaged in attracting specialists from anti-plague institutions of the CIS;
– ISTC (International Science and Technology Center). The ISTC is headquartered in
Nursultan, Kazakhstan. Current member governments include Armenia, European Union, Georgia, Japan, Kazakhstan, Republic of Korea, Kyrgyzstan, Norway, Tajikistan, and the United States.

Corporations united in the Biosafety Alliance participate in closed programs: Bavarian Nordic, Cangene Corporation, DOR Bio Pharma, Inc., Dyn Port Vaccine Company LLC, Elusys Therapeutics, Inc., Emergent Bio Solutions, Hematech, Inc., Human Genome Sciences, Inc., Nano Viricides, Inc., Pfizer Inc., Pharm Athene, Siga Technologies, Inc., Unither Virology LLC. All of them are part of the so-called Big Pharma Association of Transnational Corporations. This term refers to a branched structure in which the interests of US congressmen are intertwined with the interests of the US pharmaceutical and military industries.

One of the curators of the programs is Andrew C. Weber, US Assistant Secretary of State for Defense in 2009-2014. (on nuclear, chemical, defense programs), an experienced Russian-speaking specialist in work in the post-Soviet space. At one time, he led the export of weapons-grade uranium from Kazakhstan and Georgia, then - an employee of the private company Metabiota. Now former advisor is a strategic observer at the genetic engineering company Ginkgo BioWorks and a consultant to the US Department of Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. In addition, Weber continues to work in the Arms Control Association, as well as in the International Advisory Board of the Center for the Study of Problems of the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

US biolaboratories located along the borders of the Russian Federation have a number of common features. These objects are strictly classified and are located in cities or near cities with a population of over a million (Odessa, Kharkov, Almaty), near seaports (Odessa), airports (Tbilisi, Yerevan, Kiev) or in seismic countries such as Armenia (Yerevan, Gyumri, Ijevan ), and even in zones with a probability of 9-magnitude earthquakes (Almaty). The construction of laboratories as part of projects to counter biological threats allows the United States to fully control the biological situation on the territory of both the respective post-Soviet countries and their transboundary neighbors. Virologists know that there is only one step from studying bacteria to creating a bacteriological weapon. In addition, the biolaboratories created by the United States, operating in a closed regime, are removed from the control of the governments of the countries in which they are located. Lab personnel are often made up of Americans with diplomatic immunity, and local health officials do not have direct access to these facilities.

6

The number of laboratory staff from 50 to 250 people, far exceeding the number of personnel needed to maintain modern civil laboratories with the stated objectives.

The heads of facilities are often appointed from among the military or intelligence agencies loyal to Washington. Thus, the CRL in Tbilisi was previously headed by the head of Georgian intelligence Anna Zhvania, and he was not subordinate to the Ministry of Health, but to the Ministry of Defense of Georgia.

SECRET

7

Ukraine. Peculiarities of deployment and operation of US biolaboratories

The decision to turn Ukraine into a virtual testing ground for the study of deadly viruses and pathogens for military purposes was taken in 2005 by US President George W. Bush. To do this, he sent Indiana Senator Richard Lugar, US Assistant Secretary of State for Defense Andrew Weber and Illinois Senator Barack Obama and a number of high-ranking Pentagon and State Department officials (Kenneth Myers II, Kenneth Myers III; Thomas Moore, Andy Fisher) to Ukraine with inspection tour of biological laboratories.


Here is how Obama himself recalls in his book The Daring of Hope: Reflections on Recreating the American Dream a visit to the Ukrainian Centers for Disease Control and Prevention:
“a three-story building that kind of looked like a high school science lab,” Obama writes.
“At some point during our tour, after contemplating open windows (due to the lack of air conditioning) and strips of metal crudely screwed to the doorposts (to keep mice away), we were led to a small refrigerator, sealed with only a thread.”
In this episode, Obama's memory fails: the building of the scientific center has five floors and is located on Yaroslavskaya Street in one of the oldest districts of Kiev - Podil.


8

“A middle-aged woman in a lab coat and a surgical mask pulled some test tubes from the belly of the refrigerator, waved them 30 cm from my nose and said something in Ukrainian,” Obama continues. “This is anthrax,” the interpreter explained, pointing to the test tube in the lady's right hand. “But this,” he said, pointing to the test tube in the woman’s left hand, “is the plague.” I turned back and noticed that Lugar was already standing at the far wall of the room. "Would you like to take a closer look, Dick?" I asked, taking a few steps back myself.

On August 29, 2005, the Ministry of Health of Ukraine and the Pentagon signed the "Treaty on counteracting the threat of bioterrorism and preventing the spread of bacteriological weapons, technologies, materials and knowledge”. In accordance with the signed document, the US Department of Defense undertook to assist in improving the circulation of pathogenic substances. “Biological weapons were not developed on the territory of Ukraine either before 1991 or after,” notes political scientist Dmitry Skvortsov. - And now there are 15 military laboratories in the country at once, and their activities are absolutely opaque and unaccountable. Hence the conclusion: these facilities were created by the Pentagon as manufacturers of biological weapons. Otherwise, why aim to prevent the spread of “technologies, viruses and pathogens” used in the development of biological weapons in facilities where these weapons have never been developed?” The Ukrainian-American program for the study of dangerous biological objects is controlled by one of the structures of the Pentagon, the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA). Tellingly, until 1998, DTRA had a different name - the Defense Special Weapons Agency.

Within the framework of the Ukrainian-American agreement, technical assistance was provided to three institutions: the Ukrainian Center for Disease Control and Monitoring, the Odessa Anti-Plague Institute and the Lviv Research Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology. The Pentagon donated $800,000 worth of high-quality equipment to the Kiev center, and the United States spent more than $2 million on equipment for its Odessa biolab dollars, and the Lviv Institute received equipment for almost 470 thousand dollars. Only for these three centers the total amount of investments from the American budget exceeded 5.8 million dollars.

The activity of biolaboratories in Ukraine and their financing is supervised by the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) of the US Department of Defense. In the Pentagon, Kevin Garrett is responsible for the Ukrainian direction, and directly in Ukraine, the interests of DTRA are represented by an employee of the US Embassy, ​​Joanna Wintrol.

Through Wintrol, the Joint Biological Program project was implemented to introduce Americans to military biological facilities of the Central Sanitary and Epidemiological Directorate (TSES) of the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine.


10

The activities of "peaceful" Ukrainian research biocenters are completely classified. In accordance with the agreement signed with the US Department of Defense, the government of Ukraine is obliged to refuse public disclosure of information designated by the Pentagon as “sensitive”.

At the same time, Americans get unlimited access to information and technologies that are considered state secrets in Ukraine. At the same time, "the parties shall minimize the number of persons having access to 'confidential' information."

At the first stage of the program for the deployment of biolaboratories in Ukraine, Obama secured the allocation of $15 million to the Ukrainian Ministry of Health. The US Department of Defense also demanded that Kiev resolve the issue of creating a laboratory network in nine regions of the country with modern equipment.


In total, according to Acting Deputy Head of the US Mission Joseph Pennington, Ukraine received more than $200 million from Washington to create a network of biolaboratories. The US Department of Defense does not limit itself to a simple collection of information. Ukraine is obliged to transfer the collected strains of dangerous pathogens for "biological research" in the Pentagon laboratories.



To coordinate activities under this Agreement, each party to this Agreement shall have the right, following written notiﬁcation to the other party, to designate technical representatives for material training and services provided IpurSuant to this Agreement.

Article Ill
Thetatalcostoanietls .Bn . …_… “of: a“… ofallmaterial, training
and writes provided pursuantto this Agreement andthe associated expenses shall
heuptoﬁﬁeenﬂsmulhonus dollars.

Assistance provided by the U S. Beposternent ofﬂitfenseao- the-.-
Ministryd'l'
Health .of— Ukraine tinder Article 1 Paragraph l may include, but 18 not limited to,
_ ….,; – .. – ' ' and response. and

biological tin-eats, the Ministry of Health of Ukraine shall transfer to the us.

Departrnent of Defense requested copies of dangerous pathogen strains collected in Ukraine for cooperative biological research in the centralized laboratories in Ukraine and in the US Department of Defense-designated laboratories in the United ' States for prophylactic, protective or other peaceﬁil purposes. Details of such cooperation shall be defined in annual Joint Requirements and Implementation Plans developed in accordance with paragraph 7 of Article IV of this Agreement or ' in an implementing arrangement in accordance with Article VI of this Agreement.

The Ministry of Health of [Theme shall share with the US. Department of Defease 
data generated by the mfectious disease surveillance network of the Ministry of Health okraine or its designated agents in order for the Parties to better detect, diagnose and monitor disease outbreaks in [Maine

eleven

According to expert opinion, the US military is most interested in the characteristics of the immunity of the Eastern Slavs and the search for antibiotic-resistant infections that are specific to this region.

“Americans test pathogens on the local genotype — on people, animals, plants,” emphasizes microbiologist Igor Nikulin. “They create new pathogens, new pathogens that are resistant to commercial vaccines and antibiotics. And through Poland, Romania, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, the “earners” spread the infection further.”

US Surveillance Intelligence Network in Ukraine During the Obama administration, the Pentagon expanded its network of its Ukrainian biological laboratories.

So, back in 2012, the issue of actually complete transfer of the entire State Sanitary and Epidemiological Service of Ukraine under the control of the United States began to be considered, when the national control system for all biolaboratories was actually turned into a supranational structure controlled from Washington.

Prior to the signing of the agreement with the US Department of Defense, the work of hundreds of Ukrainian laboratories dealing with pathogens was coordinated at the national level by the Ukrainian Center for Disease Control and Monitoring. The central regime commission of the center checked the recruitment premises, security system, working conditions, personnel qualifications, issued permits. The State Sanitary and Epidemiological Service had a unified register of biolaboratories that contained information about personnel, pathogens, and the level of safety.

At the regional level, the work was coordinated by regional SES, which had laboratories for virological, bacteriological and especially dangerous infections in their structure. In total, there were more than four thousand regional biolaboratories in the country that worked with microorganisms and belonged not only to the Ministry of Health, but also to the Agroprom and other departments.

In accordance with the plans of the Pentagon, since 2012, the entire system of the State Sanitary and Epidemiological Service began to be systematically destroyed. The Central Regime Commission was liquidated, by 2016 the National Sanitary and Epidemiological Service disappeared, partially dissolving in other structures. Instead, the United States began to create a network of its own diagnostic laboratories.

biohazard level BSL-2, performing the function of collecting field biomaterial and pre-treatment of samples.

The Odessa and Kiev centers, which have the status of a BSL-3 reference laboratory, then conduct further studies of the processed materials, confirming or refuting all isolated viruses. After that, the collected information is transferred to the United States for further study.

The Pentagon planned to equip about 30 laboratories of especially dangerous infections throughout Ukraine and integrate them into a common system of “information exchange” between similar biolaboratories of the US Department of Defense in different countries. This intelligence and information system was created by the Pentagon Threat Reduction Agency and is called the Silk Road Epidemiological Surveillance Network. It unites Azerbaijan, Armenia, Georgia, Ukraine, as well as Moldova and even Belarus.

“On the territory of countries completely controlled by the United States, such as Ukraine, Georgia, Moldova and others, they can do whatever they want, and what they cannot do on their territory,” said former Ukrainian Prime Minister Mykola Azarov. — International legislation severely restricts these biological, including bacteriological, experiments. And no one will check what is being done on the territory of Ukraine.”

In May 2016, the Ukrainian Center for Disease Control and Monitoring was transformed into the Public Health Center of the Ministry of Health of Ukraine. Despite the change of the sign, this measure could not improve the epidemiological situation in any way - arranged by the United States "reform" pursued completely different goals than was announced publicly. On the contrary, the number of epidemics with fatal outcomes has even increased.

In 2010, Ukraine was covered by the California flu pandemic, which was repeated on an even larger scale 5 years later, when the epidemiological threshold was exceeded in 20 regions. From October 2015 to February 2016, more than 350 virologically confirmed deaths from this type of A (H1N1) virus were registered in Ukraine, with 40% of deaths being young people from 18 to 26 years old who did not have chronic diseases.

The creation in 2010 of the National Influenza Center, also integrated into the global network of laboratory control and epidemiology, did not help either.

“The Influenza Center prepares analytical information, which it sends to various structures of the central government: the National Security and Defense Council, the Presidential Administration, the Parliament,” Lyubov Nekrasova, former chief physician of the Ukrainian Center for Disease Control and Monitoring of the Ministry of Health , explained in an interview with the media.

- This is necessary for the country to prepare in advance for the onset of the influenza and SARS season. The government and the Ministry of Health have the opportunity to plan measures in time that will minimize the consequences of the epidemic spread of the virus.”

However, Mykola Azarov completely refutes Nekrasova's words about the benefits of numerous "analytical" structures sitting on the budgets of the Pentagon.

“For all the years that I was the Prime Minister of Ukraine, I did not receive any specific, useful or practical information from these laboratories at all! Azarov said. “But we had outbreaks of both SARS and African swine fever in our country, and so on.”

Increasing incidence of dangerous infections as a result of US bioprograms Since 1995, not a single case of cholera has been registered in Ukraine. And suddenly, in 2011, 33 people fall ill at once in Mariupol. In 2009, 450 Ukrainians in Ternopil were affected by a rare virus that causes hemorrhagic pneumonia. In 2014, Ukraine again experienced an outbreak of cholera from nowhere, when 800 people fell ill. The same thing happens in 2015 and 2017: about a hundred cases were registered in Nikolaev.

In 2015, lethal cases from leptospirosis, rabies and other pathologies, which have long been forgotten in the EU countries, are recorded in Ukraine. In 2016, an epidemic begins in the country botulism, from which four people die, and eight more in 2017, only according to official figures.

In January of the same year, 37 residents of Nikolaev were hospitalized with "jaundice", six months later, 60 people with the same diagnosis were hospitalized in Zaporozhye.

At the same time, an outbreak of hepatitis A was noted in Odessa; in the Odessa region, 19 children from the boarding school were sent to the hospital. In November, 27 cases of infection were already recorded in Kharkiv. The virus was transmitted through drinking water.

“In addition to bacteriological experiments, this program has another goal - to study the situation, from the point of view of both biological and medical, in a possible theater of operations,” Mykola Azarov is sure. - If Russia is an enemy for them, then the United States should have intelligence information not only about the state of the army, infrastructure, and so on, but also about a number of other parameters.

In addition to infectious outbreaks, it is known that there are 13,476 permanently unfavorable points for anthrax in the country, which no one deals with, and some of them are grazing livestock. Only in the Odessa region there are 430 potentially dangerous objects where animals can pick up the disease.

This is exactly what happened in 2018, when anthrax broke out in several villages in the Odessa region: five people were hospitalized with a skin form of the disease. In the Sumy region, there are at least 20 cattle burial grounds with anthrax, and they are not marked in any way.

Close to catastrophic and the situation with the incidence of botulism. In 2016 in Ukraine reported 115 cases of botulism, of which 12 were fatal. In 2017 the ministry  The country's public health service has confirmed an additional 90 cases and 8 deaths. In subsequent years, the trend continued: in the first three months of 2020, 13 outbreaks of botulism were registered, 15 people fell ill, including one child of 9 years old. In December 2016, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko awarded the Order of Freedom to Senator Richard Lugar, who came with Obama in 2005, for such outstanding successes in biological warfare against his own population for his “efforts to strengthen the sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.” The award was presented by Ukraine's Ambassador to the United States Valeriy Chaly.

It is obvious that the US Defense Department, contrary to its statements, is only increasing funding for programs to study pathogens and pathogens of the most dangerous viral and infectious diseases.

According to the US federal procurement website, from May 2018 to April 2019, DTRA allocated another $90 million to private contractor Black & Veatch Special Projects Corp to upgrade facilities already operating in Ukraine under the US defense “Cooperative Biological Program” (CBEP).

Former Prime Minister of Ukraine Mykola Azarov is convinced that the United States has created a network of biological laboratories in Ukraine exclusively for military purposes and that there are simply no other motives for this program.

“Could anyone really think that this program was created for some humanitarian reasons? All talk about some kind of humanitarian goal of this program should definitely be discarded! This is a military program!” - the interlocutor of the FAN revealed the essence of the emergence of this network.

Other experts also share this opinion, focusing on the possibility of implicit, covert use of coronaviruses and pathogens modified in bioengineering centers against the population of almost any country in the world.

“The bacteriological threat has changed its format,” notes Valery Korovin, a member of the Izborsk Club, director of the Center for Geopolitical Expertise. “Instead of chemical weapons and poison gases, there are a lot of small viruses, SARS, colds, types of colds, multiple strains of influenza. It is not so defiant, not so noticeable, and the sick themselves do not seem to be complaining. Just think, a small cold, coughing, runny nose, low temperature - who doesn’t happen to! However, when small colds come one after another, it exhausts a person, reduces his efficiency, not to mention the depressed emotional state.

According to the expert, many modified viruses, following one after another, output a person from a balanced productive state. When everyone around gets sick, coughs, sneezes , blows their nose and has a temperature, a generally negative background is created in society, and on a national scale, such an atmosphere undermines the economy and social stability.

“It would seem that a small cold ... But it is she who is the product of modern bacteriological laboratories that Russia is surrounded by. And COVID-19 is just one version of such a bacteriological weapon. Wait for an update."

Kyiv. Central reference biolaboratory The Pentagon has equipped its Kiev biocenter with the third level of biological protection and biosafety (BSL-3), which makes it possible to study the most dangerous infections and viruses.

The Ukrainian Center for Disease Control and Monitoring keeps a strategic stock of the most dangerous biological materials. The collection of pathogens was collected from all over Ukraine, and the oldest strain of the Kiev biorepository Listeria monocytogenes (a particularly dangerous species of pathogenic bacteria that causes infectious listeriosis) was isolated back in 1957.

The collection contains about 600 samples and is second only to the bank of strains of microorganisms of the Institute of Veterinary Medicine of the National Academy of Agricultural Sciences, also located under the control of the US Department of Defense Threat Reduction Agency. Taking into account both biolaboratories, more than 2100 strains, isolates of microorganisms and mycotoxin standards are in storage and in ongoing work in Kiev alone.

The Central Kiev Reference Biological Laboratory reports to the Pentagon and WHO on 67 infectious diseases. These are measles, rubella, all intestinal infections, diphtheria, tick-borne encephalitis, as well as cases of anthrax, cholera, brucellosis, leptospirosis, tularemia, listeriosis, Volyn fever and other diseases.

The center also works with a variety of pathogens of viral etiology: rabies viruses, viral hemorrhagic fevers, including Crimean Congo fever, pandemic a variant of influenza type A (H1N1), tick-borne encephalitis virus complexes, Japanese encephalitis virus complexes.

Together with the Odessa Anti-Plague Institute and the Lviv Institute of Infectious Diseases, the Kiev Center conducts research on arboviruses, which include, among other things, the most dangerous Zika virus.

Under an agreement with the Pentagon, Ukraine is transferring information and samples to biological research centers in California and Florida. Together with the center in Los Angeles, research is being carried out on hantovirus infection and leptospirosis.

It is worth adding that Ukrainian specialists were trained at the best universities in Europe, the USA, Canada under special cascade training programs to identify and respond to biological threats.

Kyiv. Research and Training Center for Animal Disease Diagnostics In 2005, an agreement was signed between the Ministry of Health of Ukraine and the US Department of Defense on cooperation in the field of preventing the spread of technologies, pathogens and knowledge that can be used in the development of biological weapons. Based on this agreement, a laboratory called the Research and Training Center for the Diagnosis of Animal Diseases (RTCADD) was established in Kiev at the expense of the Pentagon.

In 2012, the Pentagon allocated more than $2 million for the creation of a BSL-2 biohazard level biolab, and on May 20, 2013, it was inaugurated by US Ambassador John Tefft.


This advanced laboratory was established at the Institute of Veterinary Medicine of the National Academy of Agrarian Sciences of Ukraine. This institute has a unique bank of microbial strains for veterinary medicine, one of the largest since the Soviet period.

There are more than 1500 strains, isolates of microorganisms and mycotoxin standards in the collection and in ongoing work there. Of these, almost 1,400 pathogens of zoonotic diseases belong to the second pathogenicity group.

The biolaboratory is engaged in the isolation and identification of viruses that cause animal diseases, the study of the morphology, physicochemical and immunological properties of viruses, the study of the pathogenesis and immunogenesis of viral infections, as well as the development of methods for the industrial cultivation of viruses used for the manufacture of diagnostic and vaccine preparations.

On its basis, schemes for the differential diagnosis of viral animal diseases, technologies for the manufacture, control and use of live virus vaccines are developed, collections of reference and epizootic virus strains are created.

In addition, employees of the Kiev biolaboratory select and prepare strains of industrial viruses for the manufacture of diagnostic and vaccine preparations, study the effectiveness of chemotherapeutic agents for the treatment and prevention of viral diseases in animals. They also receive information about the epizootic situation in Ukraine.

The Pentagon is rightfully proud of this center - more than 760 thousand dollars were allocated from the budget of the American military department for its laboratory equipment alone.

At the same time, the Institute of Veterinary Medicine itself, on the basis of which the Pentagon created its leading biological laboratory, is on the verge of survival. According to the head of the Animal Breeders Association Ukraine Irina Palamar, due to underfunding, the Kiev authorities were going to transfer the institute to a one-day mode of operation. This poses a direct threat to the safe storage of a collection of pathogens and viruses.


Object name Institute of Veterinary Medicine (on the basis of the Central SES)
Location Ukraine, Kiev, st. Donetska, 30
Commencement May 20, 2013
Funding source US Department of Defense
Total investment, USD 2.109 million
incl. for equipment, USD 0.762 million
General contractor Black & Veatch Special Projects Corp
Purpose Center for storage and study of “reference”
strains of pathogens of especially dangerous
diseases that can cause an epidemic or
epizootic Biohazard
level BSL-2
Main pathogens African swine fever;
classical swine fever;
Anthrax;
rabies virus;
Enzootic encephalomyelitis virus
pigs;
Necrotic stick;
DNA-containing viruses;
Leptospira;
Equine influenza viruses;
The causative agents of swine erysipelas

Odessa. Central Reference Laboratory
The Odessa Central Reference Laboratory (CRL) was organized on the basis of the Ukrainian Research Anti-Plague Institute also on the basis of an agreement signed back in 2005 between the Ministry of Health of Ukraine and the Pentagon.

In the same year, a “horror story” about the Soviet biological weapons program, as well as about Odessa port gangs and other horrors, was launched through leading American publications. These fakes were designed to intimidate readers and justify serious budget expenditures on research centers in distant Ukraine.

Established 30 years ago, the National Anti-Plague Institute named after Ilya Mechnikov (UNIPCHI) is located in the Odessa district of Peresyp on Tserkovnaya Street. Late 2000s in good

























